📖 CAEP: ControlPlane (#1613)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20191017-control-plane.md

    - Check cluster health
    - Provision a new machine at the correct version
    - Poll on health of replicas with the current config hash
    - Poll on cluster health with the correct replica number
    - Delete the marked controlplane machine
- Upgrade of worker nodes is deferred to the MachineDeployment controller
- Determining if a Machine is "up to date" will be done through the use of an annotation (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/configuration-hash) that is placed on the Machine at creation time. The value of this annotation is generated by computing the Hash of the ControlPlaneSpec (minus the replicas field). This would allow triggering an Upgrade based on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.
  - For example, a CVE is patched in containerd and updated images are available. Note that the Kubernetes version is not changed. To trigger an upgrade, the user updates the image in the InfrastructureTemplate (for an AWS cluster, the image is stored in InfrastructureTemplate.Spec.AMI.ID).

> - Where necessary, we will import behaviours from the MachineSet and MachineDeployment controllers.

Reviewer: Not sure if this needs to be called out, given that it's an implementation detail that we can't guarantee until development time

- The controller should tolerate the manual removal of a replica during the upgrade process. A replica that fails during the upgrade may block the completion of the upgrade. Removal or other remedial action may be necessary to allow the upgrade to complete.

##### Control plane  healthcheck

- Will be used during scaling and upgrade operations.
- There will also be a signal to indicate a healthcheck that could not be made, e.g. due to a network partition.

> - For stacked control planes, we will present etcd quorum status within the Status.Ready field, and also report the number of active cluster members through "ReadyReplicas"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For stacked control planes, we will present etcd quorum status within the Status.Ready field, and also report the number of active cluster members through `ControlPlane.Status.ReadyReplicas`.
```

- The addition of status fields will be done conservatively to prevent them being relied upon even as we choose to deprecate them in the future.
- Unlike previous lifecycle managers (see Alternatives), ComponentStatus will be not be used as it is deprecated.
- Examples of specific checks we may perform include:
  - Checking the managed cluster has a kubeadm-config configmap, which will mark the cluster as Initialized
  - Checking the managed cluster has a kubelet-$version-configmap matching the desired
     version to check the state of upgrades
  - Checking the status of all pods marked with the system-cluster-critical priorityClass within the managed cluster, and providing a count of ready vs total.
  - Running PodExec etcdctl, or port-forwarding to etcd to get etcd cluster health information
  - Checking the status of pods marked with the app=kube-dns label as a proxy for information about the health of CNI.

##### Adoption of pre-v1alpha3 Control Plane Machines

> - Existing Control Plane Machines will need to be updated with labels matching the expected label selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Existing control plane Machines will need to be updated with labels matching the expected label selector.
```

> - The KubeadmConfigSpec can be re-created from the referenced KubeadmConfigs for the Machines matching the label selector.

Reviewer: This is a little confusing, mind to reword a little?

Reviewer 2: hmm, i think i have too much context... can you be specific about which part is confusing so i can wordsmith?

Reviewer: Well, reading it I don't immediately understand the `re-created from the referenced KubeadmConfigs`. Recreated for what purpose? Which `KubeadmConfigSpec` are we referring to and which referenced `KubeadmConfigs` ?

Reviewer 2: awesome, thanks for the help, let me see what i can do!

Reviewer 3: We'll take the v1a2 control plane machines, look up their bootstrap refs, and then try to create controlPlane.spec.kubeadmConfigSpec from them.

Reviewer 2: How does this sound?

> - The adoptee's KubeadmConfigSpec will need to be regenerated based on the adopter's KubeadmConfigs.

Reviewer 2: @vincepri bump^

  - If there is not an existing initConfiguration/clusterConfiguration only the joinConfiguration will be populated.

> - In v1alpha2, the Cluster API Bootstrap Provider is responsible for generating certificates based upon the first machine to join a cluster. The OwnerRef for these certificates are set to that of the initial machine, which causes an issue if that machine is later deleted. For v1alpha3, control plane certificate generation will be replicated in the ControlPlane provider. Given that for v1alpha2 these certificates are generated with deterministic names, i.e. prefixed with the cluster name, the migration mechanism should replace the owner reference of these certificates during migration. The bootstrap provider will need to be updated to only fallback to the v1alpha2 secret generation behavior if Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is nil.

Reviewer: > control plane certificate generation will be replicated in the ControlPlane provider
This should be outlined in the the behavioral changes section above, it wasn't clear while reading top to bottom

> - To ease the adoption of v1alpha3, the migration mechanism should be built into Cluster API controllers.

Reviewer: This is very light and needs more information how we're going to migrate, or leave it as an issue

Reviewer: One example is spreading the control plane machines across AZs, which is not going to be possible using the implementation outlined in this proposal

#### Code organization

> This proposal puts the types required in the `cluster.x-k8s.io` group. The controller(s) will also live inside `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types introduced in this proposal will live under the `cluster.x-k8s.io` API group. The controller(s) will also live inside `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api`.
```

- An upgrade will look like this:
  - Serially go through each control plane replica not at the current config hash
    - Check health of any replicas for the current config hash
    - Uniquely mark the existing replica machine through setting an annotation and persisting the change (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/selected-for-upgrade)
    - Check cluster health
    - Provision a new machine at the correct version
    - Poll on health of replicas with the current config hash
    - Poll on cluster health with the correct replica number
    - Delete the marked controlplane machine
- Upgrade of worker nodes is deferred to the MachineDeployment controller
- Determining if a Machine is "up to date" will be done through the use of an annotation (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/configuration-hash) that is placed on the Machine at creation time. The value of this annotation is generated by computing the Hash of the ControlPlaneSpec (minus the replicas field). This would allow triggering an Upgrade based on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.

>   - For example, a CVE is patched in containerd and updated images are available. Note that the Kubernetes version is not changed. To trigger an upgrade, the user updates the image in the InfrastructureTemplate (for an AWS cluster, the image is stored in InfrastructureTemplate.Spec.AMI.ID).

Reviewer: This example is very specific to the AWS provider, and it expects users to specify a specific AMI ID, which is rarely the path an operator would go in. We should address this drawback in the risks and mitigation section

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't consider this a rare example. It might not be what happens the majority of the time, but I do anticipate systems that are managing CAPI to do this.

        - [Scale Down](#scale-down)
        - [Delete of the entire ControlPlane (kubectl delete controlplane my-controlplane)](#delete-of-the-entire-controlplane-kubectl-delete-controlplane-my-controlplane)
        - [Cluster upgrade (using create-swap-and-delete)](#cluster-upgrade-using-create-swap-and-delete)
        - [Control plane healthcheck](#control-plane-healthcheck)
        - [Adoption of pre-v1alpha3 Control Plane Machines](#adoption-of-pre-v1alpha3-control-plane-machines)
      - [Code organization](#code-organization)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
      - [etcd membership](#etcd-membership)
  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha -> Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
    - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

The lexicon used in this document is described in more detail [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/book/src/reference/glossary.md).  Any discrepancies should be rectified in the main Cluster API glossary.

> Stacked Control Plane / Stacked etcd: Control plane node where etcd is colocated with the Kubernetes API server, and is running as a static pod.

Author: Now that https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/1624 has been merged, we can remove this in favor of the entry in the glossary doc.

1. As a cluster operator, I want my cluster architecture to be always consistent with best practice, in order to have reliable cluster provisioning without having to understand the details of underlying datastores, replication etc…
1. As a cluster operator, I want to know if my cluster’s control plane is healthy in order to understand if I am meeting my SLOs with my end users.
1. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to quickly respond to a Kubernetes CVE by upgrading my clusters in an automated fashion.
1. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to quickly respond to a non-Kubernetes CVE that affects my base image or Kubernetes dependencies by upgrading my clusters in an automated fashion.
1. As a cluster operator, I would like to upgrade to a new minor version of Kubernetes so that my cluster remains supported.
1. As a cluster operator, I want to know why my cluster isn’t working properly after creation. I have ended up with an API server I can access, but CNI isn’t working, and new machines are not registering themselves with the control plane.

#### Identified features from user stories

> 1. Based on the function of kubeadm, the control plane provider must be able to scale the number of replicas of a control plane from 1 to X, meeting user stories 1 through 4.

Author: I'm rewording the first story to say "multiple control plane machines" and adding handling of failure domains as a non-goal (with a link to the issue tracking additional support for adding it).

> 1. To address user story 5, the control plane provider should provide validation of the number of replicas in a control plane. Where the stacked etcd topology is used (i.e., in the default implementation), the number of replicas should be an odd number, as per [etcd best practice](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3.12/faq/#why-an-odd-number-of-cluster-members). When external etcd is used, any number is valid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. To address user story 5, the control plane provider must provide validation of the number of replicas in a control plane. Where the stacked etcd topology is used (i.e., in the default implementation), the number of replicas must be an odd number, as per [etcd best practice](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3.12/faq/#why-an-odd-number-of-cluster-members). When external etcd is used, any number is valid.
```

> 1. In service of user story 5, the control plane provider should also manage etcd membership via kubeadm as part of scaling up and down.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. In service of user story 5, the control plane provider must also manage etcd membership as part of scaling down (`kubeadm` takes care of adding the new etcd member when joining).
```

1. The control plane provider should provide indicators of health to meet user story 6 and 10. This should include at least the state of etcd and information about which replicas are currently healthy or not. For the default implementation, health attributes based on artifacts kubeadm installs on the cluster may also be of interest to cluster operators.

> 1. The control plane provider should be able to upgrade a control plane’s version of Kubernetes as well as updating the underlying machine image on cloud installations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The control plane provider must be able to upgrade a control plane’s version of Kubernetes as well as updating the underlying machine image where applicable (e.g. virtual machine based infrastructure).
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### New API Types

ControlPlane:

```go
package v1alpha3

import (
    corev1  "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    metav1  "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    cabpkv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-kubeadm/api/v1alpha2"
)

// ControlPlaneSpec defines the desired state of ControlPlane
type ControlPlaneSpec struct {
    // Number of desired machines. Defaults to 1.
    // This is a pointer to distinguish between explicit zero and not specified.

>     Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: Mainly to avoid any potential implicit differences between architectures

>     Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: The pointer issue has already been resolved.

The purpose of the definitions here are more around discussion rather than canonical implementation. We can always discuss additional validation as part of the implementation.

>     Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer: From a new user perspective, and as a new reader that assumption wasn't clear and I reviewed these structs were close to being final.

If these are just for discussion purposed, either remove them altogether to avoid confusion and only describe the most important fields, or let's make these complete.

>     Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: Validation for this field will need to be done using a validation webhook, since enforcement depends on the configuration provided.

>     Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: Added the validation requirements below. We can determine openapi vs webhook validations as part of the implementation.

>     // Version defines the desired Kubernetes version.

Reviewer: Sure, but seems worthwhile to add it here so it can closely reflect what the implementation PR will look like, more or less?

>     // Version defines the desired Kubernetes version.

Author: I think this should be out of scope for now, since we don't currently enforce any type of version validation, and anything we introduce could potentially affect the adoption of existing clusters as part of the upgrade.

This is probably something that should be a separate issue, since it affects the current uses of the exisiting version fields we have today.

>     // Version defines the desired Kubernetes version.

Reviewer: Opened https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1629

>     Version string `json:"version"`

Reviewer: We're missing the same field in Status to detect changes, or is this handled somewhere else?

Author: This is handled through the use of the configuration hash.

    // InfrastructureTemplate is a required reference to a custom resource
    // offered by an infrastructure provider.
    InfrastructureTemplate corev1.ObjectReference `json:"infrastructureTemplate"`

    // KubeadmConfigSpec is a KubeadmConfigSpec

>     // to use for initializing and joining machines to the control plane

Author: Do you have any suggestions?

>     // to use for initializing and joining machines to the control plane

Reviewer: Below for example we suggest that some fields are required, init/join/cluster configuration for example. It'd be great to give some hints on how to use this field as a user. But this can come later in docs.

>     // to use for initializing and joining machines to the control plane

Reviewer 3: I think we can defer fleshing this out until we have a prototype

    KubeadmConfigSpec cabpkv1.KubeadmConfigSpec `json:"kubeadmConfigSpec"`
}

// ControlPlaneStatus defines the observed state of ControlPlane
type ControlPlaneStatus struct {
  // Selector is the label selector in string format to avoid introspection
  // by clients, and is used to provide the CRD-based integration for the
  // scale subresource and additional integrations for things like kubectl
  // describe.. The string will be in the same format as the query-param syntax.
  // More info about label selectors: http://kubernetes.io/docs/user-guide/labels#label-selectors
  // +optional

>   Selector string `json:"selector,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Required for CRD scaling

>   Selector string `json:"selector,omitempty"`

Author: It's a requirement for the kubebuilder scale subresource: https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/markers/crd.html

  // Total number of non-terminated machines targeted by this control plane
  // (their labels match the selector).
  // +optional
  Replicas int32 `json:"replicas,omitempty"`

  // Total number of non-terminated machines targeted by this control plane
  // that have the desired template spec.
  // +optional
  UpdatedReplicas int32 `json:"updatedReplicas,omitempty"`

>   // Total number of fully running machines, including the number of active

Reviewer 3: I'm confused about the etcd portion of this comment - this potentially sounds like we're saying the value here would be 6 for a 3-machine control plane (3 machines + 3 etcd cluster members).

  // etcd cluster members when running as stacked
  // +optional
  ReadyReplicas int32 `json:"readyReplicas,omitempty"`

  // Total number of available machines targeted by this control plane.
  // This is the same as ReadyReplicas, but exposed to be similar to the
  // status exposed by MachineDeployments and Deployments
  // +optional

>   AvailableReplicas int32 `json:"readyReplicas,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Are we going to include the same logic around waiting an optional period of time before considering a replica available?

Author: I'm not sure that we need to, unless we have some concern that we could have flapping Nodes, but I don't really anticipate that case to be common enough to warrant it.

Reviewer 3: Ok, so my real question is: do we need both Ready & AvailableReplicas, if they're identical? 😄

Author: I don't think so, but every time I remove it someone asks for it to be re-added again :Joy:

Reviewer 3: If that was me, please accept my apologies! I'd like to avoid having redundant fields.

  // Total number of unavailable machines targeted by this control plane.
  // This is the total number of machines that are still required for
  // the deployment to have 100% available capacity. They may either
  // be machines that are running but not yet ready or machines
  // that still have not been created.
  // +optional
  UnavailableReplicas int32 `json:"unavailableReplicas,omitempty"`

  // Initialized denotes whether or not the control plane has the
  // uploaded kubeadm-config configmap
  Initialized bool `json:"initialized,omitempty”`

  // Ready denotes that the ControlPlane API Server is ready to

>   // recieve requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // receive requests.
```

  Ready bool `json:"ready,omitempty"`

}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:path=controlplanes,shortName=cp,scope=Namespaced,categories=cluster-api
// +kubebuilder:storageversion
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status
// +kubebuilder:subresource:scale:specpath=.spec.replicas,statuspath=.status.replicas,selectorpath=.status.selector

// ControlPlane is the Schema for the ControlPlane API
type ControlPlane struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    Spec   ControlPlaneSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
    Status ControlPlaneStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// ControlPlaneList contains a list of ControlPlane
type ControlPlaneList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    Items           []ControlPlane `json:"items"`
}

func init() {
    SchemeBuilder.Register(&ControlPlane{}, &ControlPlaneList{})
}

```

With the following validations:

> - If the referenced InitTemplate does not define external etcd (webhook):

Reviewer 3: It's part of the kubeadm config

> - If the referenced InitTemplate does not define external etcd (webhook):

Author: We have a copy of the KubeadmConfig used for bootstrapping, updating this to remove the old reference to InitTemplate in favor of `ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec`, though.

> - If the referenced InitTemplate does not define external etcd (webhook):

Reviewer: Sure, but that should be more clear in this proposal somehow. The kubeadm config can also change as outlined below, which would induce weird behaviors.

> - If the referenced InitTemplate does not define external etcd (webhook):

Author: Added a statement that the KubeadmConfigSpec needs to be treated immutably and added some clarification that we are determining etcd usage by introspecting the provided KubeadmConfigSpec.

#### Modifications required to existing API Types

- Add Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef defined as:

```go
    // ControlPlaneRef is an optional reference to a provider-specific resource that holds
    // the details for provisioning the Control Plane for a Cluster
    // +optional
    ControlPlaneRef *corev1.ObjectReference `json:"controlPlaneRef,omitempty"`
```

- Add Cluster.Status.ControlPlaneReady defined as:

```go
    // ControlPlaneReady defines if the control plane is ready
    // +optional
    ControlPlaneReady bool `json:"controlPlaneReady"`
```

#### Behavioral Changes from v1alpha2

- If Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is set:
  - [Status.ControlPlaneInitialized](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1243) is set based on the value of Status.Initialized for the referenced resource
  - Status.ControlPlaneReady is set based on the value of Status.Ready for the referenced resource, this field is intended to eventually replace Status.ControlPlaneInitialized as a field that will be kept up to date instead of set only once.
- Current behavior will be preserved if Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is not set

#### Behaviors

##### Create

> - A created ControlPlane should bootstrap a control plane with a given number of replicas

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A created ControlPlane must bootstrap a control plane with a given number of replicas
```

- If an error occurs, errorStatus and errorReason will be defined on the ControlPlane object
- Cannot create an even number of stacked control planes or anything other than 1, 3, 5, or 7

> - Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane

Reviewer 4: Is that important in terms of status? One of the additional goals is:

> - To support pre-existing, user-managed external etcd clusters

But it doesn't indicate that support for external etcd systems includes reporting on the health or status of these external resources.

Although one could argue this point **does** link the two:

>  This should include at least the state of etcd and information about which replicas are currently healthy or not.

So if "state of etcd" is desired and "external etcd" is supported, then one could argue whether etcd is external or not should be part of status.

> - Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane

Author: I agree that we should do some level of checking even for external etcd, however I'd like to defer that until we get into the implementation rather than fully hash it out now.

> - Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

Reviewer 4: I don't know, I think this is an important detail. CAPV relies on this today to know that the initial control plane node comes online and is reconciled with the core controllers before the bootstrap provider will create bootstrap data for additional nodes, control plane or otherwise.

I think bringing up an initial node by itself is an important behavior that should be maintained.

> - Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

Author: The main purpose of this, in addition to calling out support for the use case @akutz mentions, is that this ties into the provided diagrams, which are simplified to show creation as just bringing up a single control plane machine, and the additional machines are brought up using the scale up workflow.

> - Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

Reviewer: This is fine to keep, I wanted to call out that this stands out because it dictates an internal detail, while the others are worded as simple requirements

> - Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

Reviewer 4: Perhaps it can be reworded to make it more clear that it is a required behavior?

> - Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

Author: I'm going to defer this to a later iteration, currently this is mainly to simplify the proposal and related diagrams rather than a long term requirement on the controller.

> - The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec, should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate
```

> - The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec, should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate

Author: Updating, but leaving the *should* in place, since requiring `InitConfiguration` and `ClusterConfiguration` could break adoption scenarios. It also potentially limits the ability to do better defaulting down the line.

- The underlying query used to find existing Control Plane Machines is based on the following hardcoded label selector:

```yaml
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-name: my-cluster

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 3: Can you describe a time when there'd be a machine with this label but it's not owned by CAPI?

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer: What if users might want to manage control plane machines via external bootstrap methods? Or as a single machines like in v1alpha2?

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Author: Why? If someone is running a manual control plane today they wouldn't have a ControlPlane resource defined. It seems like adding an additional `owned` label would just complicate the adoption scenario.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 3: If they are creating actual `Machine` instances to be used as control plane members, starting in v1a3 they must use the `ControlPlane` to do so. We will no longer support other methods. If they want to manage the control plane outside of CAPI (e.g. `kops` phased adoption), that is totally fine and isn't impacted by this.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer: This assumption and breaking change (which I'm ok with) should be clear in the proposal, is it outlined anywhere?

In addition, the current proposal doesn't support AZ-aware control planes, as outlined below. If we don't solve that use case, I think we shouldn't disallow to use plain Machine objects as control planes.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 3: Maybe my `must` is too strong? That's my preference, at least. But I recognize it might be biting off too much for alpha3.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm trying to understand the expectations. 

One clarification about my older comment, by "external bootstrap" I meant other bootstrap providers not living in CAPI that generate `Bootstrap.Data`. The `cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"` label we're re-using here, is used to allow proper deletion for example, which we might need to retain.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Author: If they are using a different bootstrapper, I wouldn't expect them to use the default implementation of ControlPlane (or they would use an implementation of ControlPlane that works with their bootstrapper).

For AZ aware control planes I would expect us to lean on the proposal around representing failure domains rather than try to define it in this proposal: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/46

I'll work on getting that incorporated into the doc later.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer: > If they are using a different bootstrapper, I wouldn't expect them to use the default implementation of ControlPlane (or they would use an implementation of ControlPlane that works with their bootstrapper).

That's fine, but the use of the label still applies, which we expect to allow for proper deletion and control plane init.

> For AZ aware control planes I would expect us to lean on the proposal around representing failure domains rather than try to define it in this proposal: #46

Sounds good to me, thanks!

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 4: > If they are using a different bootstrapper, I wouldn't expect them to use the default implementation of ControlPlane 

Based on the discussion above I'm concerned we're starting to create a series of disparate components (control plane controller, bootstrapped controller) that all work together well when using the reference implementations of each, but start to fall down when we start picking and replacing one or the other. 

Hmmm. I wonder if we should consider bundling these providers under a single aegis. Not just repo, but making them part of the CAPI controller manager and making it a conscious choice to disable them when configuring CAPI.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Author: CABPK is already part of the CAPI controller manager for v1alpha3, this controller will also be as well.

That said, you are raising a concern that I have around the interoperability of components when "swapping the batteries" since we will now be having things under the same tree.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 4: > CABPK is already part of the CAPI controller manager for v1alpha3

Got it.

> That said, you are raising a concern that I have around the interoperability of components when "swapping the batteries" since we will now be having things under the same tree.

Exactly. I don't really see any value in these being modular components if they're mutually modular. At some point the value of modularity seems to only what we're saying, not how we're actually implementing things.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 3: I believe there is still value in this modularity. And it's ok that we have default implementations for control plane and bootstrapper that go together. The key value proposition is the generic linkage from `Cluster` to some control plane resource via `.spec.controlPlaneRef`, and from `Machine` to some bootstrap config resource via `.spec.bootstrap.configRef`. These are not prescriptive, and the contracts we've defined and are defining for control plane and bootstrap resources still hold (e.g. they must have `.status.ready`, `.status.errorReason`, and the like).

I am still optimistic that we'll see other bootstrap and control plane providers and that they'll fit in nicely with the aforementioned contracts.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 5: > If they are using a different bootstrapper, I wouldn't expect them to use the default implementation of ControlPlane (or they would use an implementation of ControlPlane that works with their bootstrapper).

@detiber Sorry if I'm asking an obvietey but, what exactly would prevent this to work? What specific assumptions are made about the bootstrapper? I understand it it kubeadm bootstrapping configuration.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Author: > @detiber Sorry if I'm asking an obvietey but, what exactly would prevent this to work? What specific assumptions are made about the bootstrapper? I understand it it kubeadm bootstrapping configuration.

In addition to the embedded types that are specific to the Kubeadm bootstrapper, there are going to be assumptions made in the ways that the controller interacts with the components based on the way that kubeadm configures clusters. 

For example, the way that we'll manage etcd will be executing commands through the api server against pods named using the conventions of kubeadm, and referencing file paths that are used by kubeadm. We'll also be modifying a ConfigMap that is added and managed by kubeadm that is referenced when joining additional control plane nodes. As we continue to define the health checks, they will be highly dependent on the way that kubeadm configures it's static pods.

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Author: I'm going to defer adding an `owned` label for now and we can revisit as part of the implementation if needed.

```

> - Generate CA certificates if this is the first control plane machine in the cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Generate CA certificates if they do not exist
```
?

> - Generate the kubeconfig secret if this is the first control plane machine in the cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Generate the kubeconfig secret if it does not exist
```
?

Given the following `cluster.yaml` file:

```yaml
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: default
Spec:
    clusterNetwork:

>     pods:

Reviewer 3: Indent one level?

      controlPlane: {}
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: aws
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: my-awsmachinetemplate
  namespace: default
spec:
  ami:
    id: ami-123456abcdef
  instanceType: t3.large
  iamInstanceProfile: "control-plane.cluster-api-provider-aws.sigs.k8s.io"
  sshKeyName: my-ssh-key
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSCluster
metadata:
  name: my-awscluster
  namespace: default
spec:
  region: us-east-1
```

![controlplane-init-1](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-1.png)
![controlplane-init-2](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-2.png)
![controlplane-init-3](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-3.png)
![controlplane-init-4](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-4.png)

##### Scale Up

- Allow scale up a control plane with stacked etcd to only 1, 3, 5, or 7, as per [etcd best practice](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3.12/faq/#why-an-odd-number-of-cluster-members).
- However, allow a control plane using an external etcd cluster to scale up to other numbers such as 2 or 4.

> - The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec, should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate
```

This stanza exists elsewhere in the doc too - do we need it in both places?

Author: Not likely.

> - Scale up operations should not be done in conjunction with an upgrade operation.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to reject updates that mutate replicas & version together? What about replicas + other details (infra template, kubeadm config)?

> - Scale up operations should not be done in conjunction with an upgrade operation.

Author: Changed to must and added clarification that we expect to enforce it.

- Scale up operations *could* be blocked based on the Health status
  - for stacked etcd quorum must be considered
  - for external etcd only availability of etcd should be considered.

![controlplane-init-6](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-6.png)

##### Scale Down

- Scale down a stacked control plane
  - For each replica being deleted:
    - Remove the replica’s etcd member from the etcd cluster
    - Update the kubeadm generated config map
- Scale down a control plane with an external etcd
  - Same as above minus Etcd management

> - Scale down operations should not be done in conjunction with an upgrade operation, this should not impact manual operations for recovery.

Reviewer 3: Same question as above re rejecting

> - Scale down operations should not be done in conjunction with an upgrade operation, this should not impact manual operations for recovery.

Author: Changed to must and added clarification that we expect to enforce it.

- Scale down operations *could* be blocked based on the Health status
  - for stacked etcd quorum must be considered
  - for external etcd only availability of etcd should be considered.

> - Scale to 0 should be rejected for the initial support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Scale to 0 must be rejected
```

![controlplane-init-7](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-7.png)

> ##### Delete of the entire ControlPlane (kubectl delete controlplane my-controlplane)

Author: Added a statement that user docs should be prioritized towards `kubectl delete cluster` and that Cluster deletion behavior will need to be modified.

> - Completely removing the control plane and issuing a delete on the underlying machines.

Author: Added a comment that Cluster deletion behavior will need to be modified.

  - Deletion is equivalent to a scale to 1 followed by a deletion of a single replica Control Plane.

##### Cluster upgrade (using create-swap-and-delete)

- Triggered on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.

>   - Must be able to trigger an upgrade for the underlying machine image (e.g. nothing in the above list has changed but an upgrade is required)

Reviewer: How are we planning to handling the image-only update if, in most cases, the infrastructure provider gathers the image id at runtime?

Reviewer 3: I believe that's what the sub-list that immediately follows this line is addressing?

Author: We are currently deferring the implementation details, but there are some potential solutions listed and we will update the proposal as we flesh it out a bit more in the implementation phase.

>     - Possible implementations include (not necessary to hammer out exact implementation right now):

Reviewer: Given that the above is a `Must` and not future work, this proposal should either contain a spec and implementation details, or remove it from here and move it to future work instead / open an issue

Author: I'd like to keep the MUST in place as a forcing function to require us to deliver the functionality for v1alpha3, but let's defer actual implementation until later so that we can avoid rushing the design right now and gather further feedback for the UX around this.

      - Manually bumping a Generation field on the ControlPlane object
      - Adding a field that is not the Generation field for users to manually bump to trigger an upgrade
      - Adding a timestamp field, something like `nextUpgrade` which can be set to a specific time in the future (far future if no upgrades are desired) and an upgrade will run when that timestamp is passed. Good for scheduling upgrades/SLOs & quickly modifying to NOW or yesterday if an upgrade is required immediately. Would potentially update the field value to some interval (2 months from now?)
- An upgrade will look like this:
  - Serially go through each control plane replica not at the current config hash

>     - Check health of any replicas for the current config hash

Reviewer: Same as above, there is no field or indication how to get or expose health information for a control plane

>     - Uniquely mark the existing replica machine through setting an annotation and persisting the change (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/selected-for-upgrade)

Reviewer: The ControlPlane object is under `cluster.x-k8s.io`, should this annotation reflect that as well?

    - Check cluster health
    - Provision a new machine at the correct version
    - Poll on health of replicas with the current config hash
    - Poll on cluster health with the correct replica number
    - Delete the marked controlplane machine

> - Upgrade of worker nodes is deferred to the MachineDeployment controller

Reviewer: This is a UX issue that should be addressed in the Risks and mitigation section

Author: This is out of scope for the Control Plane management and does not represent any changes to the existing behavior.

Reviewer: Let's outline what you just said either in R&M or in the non-goal / future work section

Author: I'd rather just remove this statement all together if it is causing confusion. There is no risk and mitigation required for something that is out of scope (worker nodes are not part of the control plane). This was previously scoped to the Upgrade CAEP that is no longer around.

Reviewer 3: Agree that it doesn't make sense to put in risks & mitigations. +1 to removing entirely, or, at most, listing it as a non-goal.

- Determining if a Machine is "up to date" will be done through the use of an annotation (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/configuration-hash) that is placed on the Machine at creation time. The value of this annotation is generated by computing the Hash of the ControlPlaneSpec (minus the replicas field). This would allow triggering an Upgrade based on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.

>   - For example, a CVE is patched in containerd and updated images are available. Note that the Kubernetes version is not changed. To trigger an upgrade, the user updates the image in the InfrastructureTemplate (for an AWS cluster, the image is stored in InfrastructureTemplate.Spec.AMI.ID).

Reviewer 6: Just curious how will the hash be calculated. Since infrastructureTemplate is an ObjectReference, so calculating hash  of ControlPlane will need to retrieve the actual object (AWSMachineTemplate) and include the Spec of it?

Author: @jzhoucliqr Since the Infrastructure templates are expected to be immutable after creation, we only need to rely on the reference. This is similar to how we treat the references in MachineDeployments today.

Reviewer 6: got it. Thanks.

        - [Control plane healthcheck](#control-plane-healthcheck)
        - [Adoption of pre-v1alpha3 Control Plane Machines](#adoption-of-pre-v1alpha3-control-plane-machines)
      - [Code organization](#code-organization)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
      - [etcd membership](#etcd-membership)
  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha -> Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
    - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

The lexicon used in this document is described in more detail [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/book/src/reference/glossary.md).  Any discrepancies should be rectified in the main Cluster API glossary.
Stacked Control Plane / Stacked etcd: Control plane node where etcd is colocated with the Kubernetes API server, and is running as a static pod.

### References

[Kubernetes Control Plane Management Overview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nlWKEr9OP3IeZO5W2cMd3A55ZXLOXcnc6dFu0K9_bms/edit#)

## Summary

> 

Reviewer 3: Suggest adding an intro, something like:

This proposal outlines adding control plane management to Cluster API....

> Management of the control plane is currently handled in Cluster API at the infrastructure provider level (although many providers have converged on using the same implementation), based on the special annotation of standard Cluster API machines which then changes the machine bootstrapping logic within a particular infrastructure provider.

Reviewer 3: I don't follow this sentence. We don't use annotations to mark a machine as a control plane machine (we do have a label, though), and infrastructure providers (generally) don't do anything to change machine bootstrapping logic. (There is some logic, such as adding a machine to a load balancer, that an infrastructure provider may do when it detects a new control plane machine.)

Reviewer 4: > although many providers have converged on using the same implementation

I'm not sure to what this is referring. What is the convergence?

The purpose of this document is to instead treat machine-based control plane management as a first-class component that is part of the API and Cluster, where multiple Cluster API machines will belong to a single control plane object, with its own infrastructure independent provider. The control plane covered by this document is defined as consisting of the Kubernetes API server, scheduler, controller manager, DNS and proxy services, and the underlying etcd datastore.

## Motivation

### Goals

- To establish new resource types for control plane management
- To support single node and multiple control plane instances

> - To enable declarative orchestrated control plane upgrades

Reviewer 3: Do we need to call out that we want to support replacing control plane machines without performing Kubernetes upgrades (because we need to roll out an OS update)?

- To provide a default machine-based implementation using kubeadm

#### Additional goals of the default kubeadm machine-based Implementation

- To provide a kubeadm-based implementation that is infrastructure provider agnostic
- To manage kubeadm-based "stacked etcd" control plane deployments
- To enable scaling of the number of nodes in a control plane deployment
- To support pre-existing, user-managed external etcd clusters
- To support only user-initiated remediation:
  E.g. user deletes a Machine. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the corresponding etcd member and updating related metadata

### Non-Goals / Future Work

Non-Goals listed in this document are intended to scope bound the current v1alpha3 implementation and are subject to change based on user feedback over time.  

- To manage non-machine based topologies, e.g.
  - Pod based control planes; these can be managed via standard kubernetes objects.
  - Non-node control planes (i.e. EKS, GKE, AKS); these can be managed via the respective APIs.
- To manage CA certificates outside of what is provided by Kubeadm bootstrapping

> - To manage etcd clusters in any topology other than “stacked etcd.”

Reviewer 7: nit: replace "smart quotes" with normal quotes. (or just remove quotes entirely, since the term is in the glossary)

  // recieve requests.
  Ready bool `json:"ready,omitempty"`

}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:path=controlplanes,shortName=cp,scope=Namespaced,categories=cluster-api
// +kubebuilder:storageversion
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status
// +kubebuilder:subresource:scale:specpath=.spec.replicas,statuspath=.status.replicas,selectorpath=.status.selector

// ControlPlane is the Schema for the ControlPlane API
type ControlPlane struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    Spec   ControlPlaneSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
    Status ControlPlaneStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// ControlPlaneList contains a list of ControlPlane
type ControlPlaneList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    Items           []ControlPlane `json:"items"`
}

func init() {
    SchemeBuilder.Register(&ControlPlane{}, &ControlPlaneList{})
}

```

With the following validations:

- If the referenced InitTemplate does not define external etcd (webhook):
  - ControlPlane.Spec.Replicas in [1, 3, 5, 7]

> - ControlPlane.Spec.Version != “” (openapi)

Reviewer 7: nit: replace "smart" quotes

- Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane
- Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas
- The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec, should specify the initConfiguration, clusterConfiguration, and joinConfiguration stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate
- The underlying query used to find existing Control Plane Machines is based on the following hardcoded label selector:

```yaml
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-name: my-cluster
      cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"
```

- Generate CA certificates if this is the first control plane machine in the cluster
- Generate the kubeconfig secret if this is the first control plane machine in the cluster

Given the following `cluster.yaml` file:

```yaml
---
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: default
Spec:

>     clusterNetwork:

Reviewer 6: Is clusterNetwork mainly to generate controlPlane kubeadmConfig? If so, is it a more natural fit to move under ControlPlaneSpec?

Reviewer 7: The cluster network (i.e. the pod network) is used by the data plane, although in some cases, control plane component (kube-controller-manager) needs to know the value, too.

For reference, see https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#pod-network.

Reviewer 6: yeah, but afaik, the definition here is only used to generate ClusterConfiguration for kubeadmConfig, which only applies to ControlPlane. Only exception is APIServerPort which is used by AWS provider to create elb.

Author: With the *default* implementations this is only currently used in those places. I think it's a valuable conversation to have if having ClusterNetwork defined as part of the Cluster Spec still has value to the project, I'm not sure I want to take that on as part of this proposal, though.

Reviewer 6: sure. thanks.

      - Adding a field that is not the Generation field for users to manually bump to trigger an upgrade
      - Adding a timestamp field, something like `nextUpgrade` which can be set to a specific time in the future (far future if no upgrades are desired) and an upgrade will run when that timestamp is passed. Good for scheduling upgrades/SLOs & quickly modifying to NOW or yesterday if an upgrade is required immediately. Would potentially update the field value to some interval (2 months from now?)
- An upgrade will look like this:
  - Serially go through each control plane replica not at the current config hash
    - Check health of any replicas for the current config hash
    - Uniquely mark the existing replica machine through setting an annotation and persisting the change (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/selected-for-upgrade)
    - Check cluster health
    - Provision a new machine at the correct version
    - Poll on health of replicas with the current config hash
    - Poll on cluster health with the correct replica number
    - Delete the marked controlplane machine
- Upgrade of worker nodes is deferred to the MachineDeployment controller

> - Determining if a Machine is “up to date” will be done through the use of an annotation (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/configuration-hash) that is placed on the Machine at creation time. The value of this annotation is generated by computing the Hash of the ControlPlaneSpec (minus the replicas field). This would allow triggering an Upgrade based on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.

Reviewer 7: nit: replace "smart" quotes

  - For example, a CVE is patched in containerd and updated images are available. Note that the Kubernetes version is not changed. To trigger an upgrade, the user updates the image in the InfrastructureTemplate (for an AWS cluster, the image is stored in InfrastructureTemplate.Spec.AMI.ID).
- Where necessary, we will import behaviours from the MachineSet and MachineDeployment controllers.
- The controller should tolerate the manual removal of a replica during the upgrade process. A replica that fails during the upgrade may block the completion of the upgrade. Removal or other remedial action may be necessary to allow the upgrade to complete.

##### Control plane  healthcheck

- Will be used during scaling and upgrade operations.
- There will also be a signal to indicate a healthcheck that could not be made, e.g. due to a network partition.

> - For stacked control planes, we will present etcd quorum status within the Status.Ready field, and also report the number of active cluster members through “ReadyReplicas”

Reviewer 7: nit: replace "smart" quotes

- When performing a scaling operation, or an upgrade using create-swap-delete, there are periods when there are an even number of nodes. Any network partitions or host failures that occur at this point will cause the etcd cluster to split brain. Etcd 3.4 is under consideration for Kubernetes 1.17, which brings non-voting cluster members, which can be used to safely add new machines without affecting quorum. [Changes to kubeadm](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1793) will be required to support this and is out of scope for the timeframe of v1alpha3.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Standard unit/integration & e2e behavioral test plans will apply.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

This work is too early to detail requirements for graduation to beta. At a minimum, etcd membership and quorum risks will need to be addressed prior to beta.

### Upgrade Strategy

- v1alpha2 managed clusters that match certain known criteria should be able to be adopted as part of the upgrade to v1alpha3, other clusters should continue to function as they did previously.

## Alternatives

> For the purposes of designing upgrades, two existing lifecycle managers were examined in detail: kops and Cloud Foundry Container Runtime. Their approaches are detailed in the accompanying “[Cluster API Upgrade Experience Reports](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RnUG9mHrS_qmhmm052bO6Wu0dldCamwPmTA1D0jCWW8/edit#)” document.

Reviewer 7: nit: replace "smart" quotes

### References

[Kubernetes Control Plane Management Overview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nlWKEr9OP3IeZO5W2cMd3A55ZXLOXcnc6dFu0K9_bms/edit#)

## Summary

Management of the control plane is currently handled in Cluster API at the infrastructure provider level (although many providers have converged on using the same implementation), based on the special annotation of standard Cluster API machines which then changes the machine bootstrapping logic within a particular infrastructure provider.
The purpose of this document is to instead treat machine-based control plane management as a first-class component that is part of the API and Cluster, where multiple Cluster API machines will belong to a single control plane object, with its own infrastructure independent provider. The control plane covered by this document is defined as consisting of the Kubernetes API server, scheduler, controller manager, DNS and proxy services, and the underlying etcd datastore.

## Motivation

> ### Goals

Reviewer 4: I do not see in goals or non-goals any mention of upgrades of single node control planes where there is no external control plane endpoint (CPE). In a Slack conversation with @ncdc, I said my understanding was that single-node control planes without an external CPE would not be supported by any upgrade logic built into CAPI. I think it's worth calling that out explicitly.

- To establish new resource types for control plane management

> - To support single node and multiple control plane instances

Reviewer 4: Is single node support dependent upon the existence of an external control plane endpoint?

Author: Yes, will clarify

Author: I've updated the goals for this.

- To enable declarative orchestrated control plane upgrades
- To provide a default machine-based implementation using kubeadm

#### Additional goals of the default kubeadm machine-based Implementation

- To provide a kubeadm-based implementation that is infrastructure provider agnostic

> - To manage kubeadm-based "stacked etcd" control plane deployments

Reviewer 4: There should be a comma after _kubeadm-based_ as both it and "stacked etcd" are adjectives describing the type of control plane deployment

- To enable scaling of the number of nodes in a control plane deployment
- To support pre-existing, user-managed external etcd clusters
- To support only user-initiated remediation:
  E.g. user deletes a Machine. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the corresponding etcd member and updating related metadata

### Non-Goals / Future Work

Non-Goals listed in this document are intended to scope bound the current v1alpha3 implementation and are subject to change based on user feedback over time.  

- To manage non-machine based topologies, e.g.
  - Pod based control planes; these can be managed via standard kubernetes objects.
  - Non-node control planes (i.e. EKS, GKE, AKS); these can be managed via the respective APIs.
- To manage CA certificates outside of what is provided by Kubeadm bootstrapping
- To manage etcd clusters in any topology other than stacked etcd.
- To address disaster recovery constraints, e.g. restoring a control plane from 0 replicas using a filesystem or volume snapshot copy of data persisted in etcd.

> - To support rollbacks, as there is no datastore rollback guarantee for Kubernetes. Consumers should perform backups of the cluster prior to performing potentially destructive operations.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we necessarily need to provide specific guidance/links on cluster backups in this proposal

> - To mutate the configuration of live running clusters (e.g. changing api-server flags), as this is the responsibility of the [component configuration working group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/wg-component-standard).

Reviewer 4: There should be a comma after _live_ as both it and _running_ are adjectives describing _clusters_

- To support auto remediation. We will treat control plane health as either informational or blocking for upgrades in the first instance based on real world feedback regarding a new control plane health indicator. Using such a mechanism to automatically replace machines may lead to unintended behaviours.
- To provide configuration of external cloud providers (i.e. the [cloud-controller-manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/)).This is deferred to kubeadm.
- To provide CNI configuration. This is deferred to external, higher level tooling.
- To provide the upgrade logic to handle changes to infrastructure (networks, firewalls etc…) that may need to be done to support a control plane on a newer version of Kubernetes (e.g. a cloud controller manager requires updated permissions against infrastructure APIs). We expect the work on add-on components to help to resolve some of these issues.
- To provide horizontal or vertical auto scaling of control plane components, especially as etcd places hard performance limits beyond 3 nodes (due to latency).

## Proposal

> ### User Stories

Author: Updated with explicit numbering

1. The control plane provider should provide indicators of health to meet user story 6 and 10. This should include at least the state of etcd and information about which replicas are currently healthy or not. For the default implementation, health attributes based on artifacts kubeadm installs on the cluster may also be of interest to cluster operators.
1. The control plane provider must be able to upgrade a control plane’s version of Kubernetes as well as updating the underlying machine image on where applicable (e.g. virtual machine based infrastructure).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### New API Types

ControlPlane:

```go
package v1alpha3

import (
    corev1  "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    metav1  "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    cabpkv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-kubeadm/api/v1alpha2"
)

// ControlPlaneSpec defines the desired state of ControlPlane
type ControlPlaneSpec struct {
    // Number of desired machines. Defaults to 1.
    // This is a pointer to distinguish between explicit zero and not specified.

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: > I'm very concerned about a situation of how a control plane with static IPs is supposed to exist with the control plane management taking on a model similar to a MachineDeployment with one or more replicas.

Is this something that you believe needs to be solved by the initial implementation? Or is it something that we can likely add through iteration later?

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer 4: Hi @detiber,

> Is this something that you believe needs to be solved by the initial implementation? Or is it something that we can likely add through iteration later?

This is a case where I think it's important to call out how this approach works with on-prem environments that don't have the vertical solution for compute instance/network management like AWS does for example. It's already an issue for worker nodes -- no good way to assign static IPs via MachineDeployments -- and this new model just extends the issue to the control plane.

Additionally, consider load balancers. CAPA has a cheat for LBs - it doesn't need to know the IPs of instances to connect an LB's target groups to specific instances, AWS ELBs can connect to instance refs before ever knowing the IP of an instance.

For CAPV we must know the IPs to connect LBs with the tech currently available. And this is likely true for other on-prem providers that exist today or might exist. When it comes to bringing your own LB ahead of time, this is possible because we can simply pre-define the LB's targets with static IPs and ensure the control plane machines are configured to use these static IPs. With this new control plane model, we'd be limited to DHCP addressing, making it nearly impossible to connect an existing load balancer with any type of acceptable UX.

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer 7: @akutz Thanks for bringing this up. I agree strongly that on-prem is an important use case, and that we should enable it as much as possible.

As for updating an external LB, I think there are a couple options that work with the current proposal . 
1. Have each Machine update the LB during bootstrapping; that's possible by adding pre/post commands to the KubeadmConfig.
2. Preallocate a pool of static IPs and configure the LB with them. The Infra Provider can follow label/annotation on a Machine to request an instance with an IP from the preallocated pool.

Sometimes an external LB is not available. Then a VIP might be used. That's a use case that should, I think, work with the default implementation, but maybe not in this first proposal.

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer 8: @thebsdbox any thoughts from your experimentations?

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: I still want to be able to differentiate between nil and 0, since users might be confused if they explicitly set it to 0 and it magically becomes 1, vs nil becoming 1.

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Author: Load balancer (or some other externally stable endpoint) has now been listed as a requirement.

    // the deployment to have 100% available capacity. They may either
    // be machines that are running but not yet ready or machines
    // that still have not been created.
    // +optional
    UnavailableReplicas int32 `json:"unavailableReplicas,omitempty"`

    // Initialized denotes whether or not the control plane has the
    // uploaded kubeadm-config configmap.
    Initialized bool `json:"initialized,omitempty”`

    // Ready denotes that the ControlPlane API Server is ready to
    // receive requests.
    Ready bool `json:"ready,omitempty"`

    // ErrorReason indicates that there is a problem reconciling the
    // state, and will be set to a token value suitable for
    // programmatic interpretation.
    // +optional
    ErrorReason ControlPlaneStatusError `json:"errorReason,omitempty"`

    // ErrorMessage indicates that there is a problem reconciling the
    // state, and will be set to a descriptive error message.
    // +optional
    ErrorMessage *string `json:"errorMessage,omitempty"`

    // Phase represents the current phase of control plane actuation.
    // E.g. Pending, Initialized, Ready, ScalingUp, ScalingDown, Failed etc.
    // +optional

>     Phase string `json:"phase,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: The word _phase_ sounds wonky here. Maybe _state_? It works better with well-defined states as well:

```golang
// ControlPlaneState represents the current phase of control plane actuation.
type ControlPlaneState string

const (
	ControlPlanePending     ControlPlaneState = "pending"
	ControlPlaneInitialized ControlPlaneState = "initialized"
	ControlPlaneReady       ControlPlaneState = "ready"
	ControlPlaneScalingUp   ControlPlaneState = "scaling-up"
	ControlPlaneScalingDown ControlPlaneState = "scaling-down"
	ControlPlaneFailed      ControlPlaneState = "failed"
)
```

However, the Kubernetes API conventions indicates [_phase_ is being deprecated in favor of conditions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties) anyway:

> Some resources in the v1 API contain fields called phase, and associated message, reason, and other status fields. The pattern of using phase is deprecated. Newer API types should use conditions instead. 

How would we rewrite the above as conditions?

Reviewer: > The word phase sounds wonky here. Maybe state?

We've discussed this during the v1alpha2 planning, `phase` is the preferred word to describe the state the object is in,  I'd prefer if we keep things consistent between our types.

 > How would we rewrite the above as conditions?

This is a larger conversation on how we define and describe a state machine. @timothysc is thinking about this problem already, I'd suggest to move this topic to an issue though.

Author: This is something that we discussed earlier on the Google doc and decided to stick with Phase to align with the other Cluster API components for now, and we should attempt to address this holistically in the future. /cc @timothysc

Reviewer 4: Isn't it exactly the time to adopt recommendations rather than defer, defer, defer? Just because it's hard doesn't mean it's wrong. From what I read _conditions_ are the recommended approach, and it seems like we should figure out how to use them since this is net-new work.

Reviewer 8: We also have this note that says Conditions themselves are being deprecated https://github.com/detiber/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/proposals/machine-api-proposal.md#conditions

Reviewer 8: Believe this is the history of the statements: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/51594#issuecomment-334646068

It's a case not to base things not on Deployments in the core API, but on the newer StatefulSets and DaemonSets instead.

Author: Considering the contention this topic brings, I'd like to defer this to the issue created to track this discussion more broadly: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1658

    // UpdateClusterError indicates that an error was encountered
    // when trying to update the cluster.
    UpdateClusterError ClusterStatusError = "UpdateError"

    // DeleteClusterError indicates that an error was encountered
    // when trying to delete the cluster.
    DeleteClusterError ClusterStatusError = "DeleteError"
)
```

With the following validations:

- If `ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` does not define external etcd (webhook):
  - `ControlPlane.Spec.Replicas` in [1, 3, 5, 7]
- `ControlPlane.Spec.Version != ""` (openapi)

And the following defaulting:

- `ControlPlaneSpec.Replicas: 1` (openapi or webhook)

#### Modifications required to existing API Types

- Add `Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef` defined as:

```go
    // ControlPlaneRef is an optional reference to a provider-specific resource that holds
    // the details for provisioning the Control Plane for a Cluster
    // +optional
    ControlPlaneRef *corev1.ObjectReference `json:"controlPlaneRef,omitempty"`
```

- Add `Cluster.Status.ControlPlaneReady` defined as:

```go
    // ControlPlaneReady defines if the control plane is ready
    // +optional

>     ControlPlaneReady bool `json:"controlPlaneReady"`

Reviewer 4: Kubernetes API conventions [highly recommends](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required) using `// +optional` where `omitempty` is present

```

#### Behavioral Changes from v1alpha2

- If Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is set:
  - [Status.ControlPlaneInitialized](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1243) is set based on the value of Status.Initialized for the referenced resource.
  - Status.ControlPlaneReady is set based on the value of Status.Ready for the referenced resource, this field is intended to eventually replace Status.ControlPlaneInitialized as a field that will be kept up to date instead of set only once.
- Current behavior will be preserved if `Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef` is not set.

#### Behaviors

##### Create

- After a ControlPlane object is created, it must bootstrap a control plane with a given number of replicas.
- If an error occurs, `ControlPlane.Status.ErrorStatus` and `ControlPlane.Status.ErrorMessage` are populated.
- Cannot create an even number of stacked control planes or anything other than 1, 3, 5, or 7
- Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane
- Creating a ControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a ControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the ControlPlane to 3 replicas

> - The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via `ControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` should specify the `InitConfiguration`, `ClusterConfiguration`, and `JoinConfiguration` stanzas, and the ControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate.

Reviewer 4: Is this any different than how this is handled today? If not, why call it out explicitly?

Author: Today each Machine has a reference to it's own KubeadmConfig, in this case we are taking a singular KubeadmConfig and using it to create the individual KubeadmConfigs for each Machine similar to how the MachineDeployment uses a KubeadmConfigTemplate.

- The underlying query used to find existing Control Plane Machines is based on the following hardcoded label selector:

```yaml
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-name: my-cluster
      cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"
```

- Generate CA certificates if they do not exist
- Generate the kubeconfig secret if it does not exist

Given the following `cluster.yaml` file:

```yaml
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: default

> Spec:

Reviewer 4: `s/Spec/spec/`

      - Manually bumping a Generation field on the ControlPlane object
      - Adding a field that is not the Generation field for users to manually bump to trigger an upgrade
      - Adding a timestamp field, something like `nextUpgrade` which can be set to a specific time in the future (far future if no upgrades are desired) and an upgrade will run when that timestamp is passed. Good for scheduling upgrades/SLOs & quickly modifying to NOW or yesterday if an upgrade is required immediately. Would potentially update the field value to some interval (2 months from now?)
- An upgrade will look like this:
  - Serially go through each control plane replica not at the current config hash
    - Check health of any replicas for the current config hash
    - Uniquely mark the existing replica machine through setting an annotation and persisting the change (controlplane.cluster.x-k8s.io/selected-for-upgrade)
    - Check cluster health
    - Provision a new machine at the correct version
    - Poll on health of replicas with the current config hash
    - Poll on cluster health with the correct replica number

>     - Delete the marked controlplane machine

Reviewer 6: Is the etcd membership management mentioned in "Scale Down" section also needed here?

Author: Added

---
title: Control Plane Management  
authors:
  - "@detiber”
  - "@chuckha”
  - "@randomvariable"
  - "@dlipovetsky"
reviewers:
  - "@ncdc"
  - "@timothysc"
  - "@vincepri"

> creation-date: 2019-09-18

Reviewer: Nit the creation date here doesn't reflect the file name

        - [Adoption of pre-v1alpha3 Control Plane Machines](#adoption-of-pre-v1alpha3-control-plane-machines)
      - [Code organization](#code-organization)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
      - [etcd membership](#etcd-membership)
      - [Upgrade where changes needed to KubeadmConfig are not currently possible](#upgrade-where-changes-needed-to-kubeadmconfig-are-not-currently-possible)
  - [Design Details](#design-details)
    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha -> Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
    - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

The lexicon used in this document is described in more detail [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/book/src/reference/glossary.md).  Any discrepancies should be rectified in the main Cluster API glossary.

### References

[Kubernetes Control Plane Management Overview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nlWKEr9OP3IeZO5W2cMd3A55ZXLOXcnc6dFu0K9_bms/edit#)

## Summary

> This proposal outlines a new process for Cluster API to manage control plane machines as a single concept. This includes

Reviewer 2: cc @ncdc 

i reworked the summary and motivation section. ptal!

3. In service of user story 5, the control plane provider must also manage etcd membership via kubeadm as part of scaling down (`kubeadm` takes care of adding the new etcd member when joining).
4. The control plane provider should provide indicators of health to meet user story 6 and 10. This should include at least the state of etcd and information about which replicas are currently healthy or not. For the default implementation, health attributes based on artifacts kubeadm installs on the cluster may also be of interest to cluster operators.
5. The control plane provider must be able to upgrade a control plane’s version of Kubernetes as well as updating the underlying machine image on where applicable (e.g. virtual machine based infrastructure).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### New API Types

ControlPlane:

```go
package v1alpha3

import (
    corev1  "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    metav1  "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
    cabpkv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-kubeadm/api/v1alpha2"
)

// ControlPlaneSpec defines the desired state of ControlPlane

> type ControlPlaneSpec struct {

Reviewer 9: We proposed this in slack, but may be worth doing a `s/ControlPlaneSpec/KubeadmControlPlaneSpec/` to make it clear that this is not a generic control plane resource, but will be kubeadm specific.

Reviewer 10: +1

Author: Renaming has been done, thanks for the feedback!

>     // Number of desired machines. Defaults to 1. When stacked etcd is used only 1, 3, 5, or 7 will be permitted, as per [etcd best practice](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3.12/faq/#why-an-odd-number-of-cluster-members).

Reviewer 10: why 7 as the max?

Reviewer 7: There is no hard maximum, but as the quorum increases, performance decreases, so most common deployments are 3 (to tolerate 1 failed member) and 5 (to tolerate 2 failed members).

I would be ok with allowing any odd number.

Author: Updated.

---
kind: ControlPlane
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-control-plane
  namespace: default
spec:
  replicas: 1
  version: v1.16.0
  infrastructureTemplate:
    kind: AWSMachineTemplate
    apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
    namespace: default
    name: my-awsmachinetemplate
  kubeadmConfigSpec:
    initConfiguration:
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: aws
    clusterConfiguration:
      apiServer:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: aws
      controllerManager:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: aws
    joinConfiguration:
      controlPlane: {}
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: aws
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: my-awsmachinetemplate
  namespace: default
spec:
  ami:
    id: ami-123456abcdef
  instanceType: t3.large
  iamInstanceProfile: "control-plane.cluster-api-provider-aws.sigs.k8s.io"
  sshKeyName: my-ssh-key
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2

> kind: AWSCluster

Reviewer 10: Would it make sense to make this more general? Maybe we can use a "fake" provider name like `SomeProviderCluster` since this is in the cluster-api repo we should avoid specific  infra-provider references in proposals IMO (unless we're giving examples for the other providers too). I know it's meant to be an example for illustration purposes but using a specific reference doesn't encourage the reader to have other infra providers in mind when reading the proposal.

Reviewer 7: Good point. The concrete schema is helpful for discussion, but we could easily replace some terms (e.g. AWS, ami, region), but keep the schema.

Author: This has now been updated, thanks for the feedback.

#### Additional goals of the default kubeadm machine-based Implementation

- To provide a kubeadm-based implementation that is infrastructure provider agnostic
- To enable declarative orchestrated replacement of control plane machines, such as to rollout an OS-level CVE fix.
- To manage a kubeadm-based, "stacked etcd" control plane
- To enable scaling of the number of control plane nodes
- To support pre-existing, user-managed, external etcd clusters
- To support only user-initiated remediation:
  E.g. user deletes a Machine. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the corresponding etcd member and updating related metadata

### Non-Goals / Future Work

Non-Goals listed in this document are intended to scope bound the current v1alpha3 implementation and are subject to change based on user feedback over time.  

- To manage non-machine based topologies, e.g.
  - Pod based control planes; these can be managed via standard kubernetes objects.
  - Non-node control planes (i.e. EKS, GKE, AKS); these can be managed via the respective APIs.
- To manage CA certificates outside of what is provided by Kubeadm bootstrapping

> - To manage etcd clusters in any topology other than stacked etcd.

Author: Correct, since we aren't involved with the lifecycle of the user-managed, external etcd cluster we do not care about how it is configured or managed :)

- To address disaster recovery constraints, e.g. restoring a control plane from 0 replicas using a filesystem or volume snapshot copy of data persisted in etcd.
- To support rollbacks, as there is no datastore rollback guarantee for Kubernetes. Consumers should perform backups of the cluster prior to performing potentially destructive operations.
- To mutate the configuration of live, running clusters (e.g. changing api-server flags), as this is the responsibility of the [component configuration working group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/wg-component-standard).
- To support auto remediation. We will treat control plane health as either informational or blocking for upgrades in the first instance based on real world feedback regarding a new control plane health indicator. Using such a mechanism to automatically replace machines may lead to unintended behaviours.
- To provide configuration of external cloud providers (i.e. the [cloud-controller-manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/)).This is deferred to kubeadm.
- To provide CNI configuration. This is deferred to external, higher level tooling.

> - To provide the upgrade logic to handle changes to infrastructure (networks, firewalls etc…) that may need to be done to support a control plane on a newer version of Kubernetes (e.g. a cloud controller manager requires updated permissions against infrastructure APIs). We expect the work on add-on components to help to resolve some of these issues.

Author: done

> - To provide horizontal or vertical auto scaling of control plane components, especially as etcd places hard performance limits beyond 3 nodes (due to latency).

Author: The later, we are only addressing manual scaling (through declarative updates or the scale subresource).

> - To provide horizontal or vertical auto scaling of control plane components, especially as etcd places hard performance limits beyond 3 nodes (due to latency).

Author: I tried rewording this, please let me know if it helps clarify.

> - To provide automation around the horizontal or vertical scaling of control plane components, especially as etcd places hard performance limits beyond 3 nodes (due to latency).

Reviewer 11: @detiber yup, wording is much clearer now, ++

- To support upgrades where the infrastructure does not rely on a Load Balancer for access to the API Server.

## Proposal

### User Stories

1. As a cluster operator, I want my Kubernetes clusters to have high availability control planes to meet my SLOs with application developers.

> 2. As a developer, I want to be able to deploy as small as possible a cluster, e.g. to meet my organization’s cost requirements.

Author: done.

3. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to scale up my control plane to meet the increased demand that workloads are placing on my cluster.
4. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to remove a control plane replica that I have determined is faulty and should be replaced.
5. As a cluster operator, I want my cluster architecture to be always consistent with best practices, in order to have reliable cluster provisioning without having to understand the details of underlying datastores, replication etc…
6. As a cluster operator, I want to know if my cluster’s control plane is healthy in order to understand if I am meeting my SLOs with my end users.
7. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to quickly respond to a Kubernetes CVE by upgrading my clusters in an automated fashion.
8. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to quickly respond to a non-Kubernetes CVE that affects my base image or Kubernetes dependencies by upgrading my clusters in an automated fashion.
9. As a cluster operator, I would like to upgrade to a new minor version of Kubernetes so that my cluster remains supported.

> 10. As a cluster operator, I want to know why my cluster isn’t working properly after creation. I have ended up with an API server I can access, but CNI isn’t working, and new machines are not registering themselves with the control plane.

Author: I think we can likely reword this, but the idea is to surface some type of a signal that there is an issue with the ControlPlane.

> 10. As a cluster operator, I want to know why my cluster isn’t working properly after creation. I have ended up with an API server I can access, but CNI isn’t working, and new machines are not registering themselves with the control plane.

Author: I attempted to reword.

    // Total number of unavailable machines targeted by this control plane.
    // This is the total number of machines that are still required for
    // the deployment to have 100% available capacity. They may either
    // be machines that are running but not yet ready or machines
    // that still have not been created.
    // +optional
    UnavailableReplicas int32 `json:"unavailableReplicas,omitempty"`

    // Initialized denotes whether or not the control plane has the
    // uploaded kubeadm-config configmap.
    // +optional
    Initialized bool `json:"initialized,omitempty”`

    // Ready denotes that the ControlPlane API Server is ready to
    // receive requests.
    // +optional
    Ready bool `json:"ready,omitempty"`

    // ErrorReason indicates that there is a problem reconciling the
    // state, and will be set to a token value suitable for
    // programmatic interpretation.
    // +optional
    ErrorReason ControlPlaneStatusError `json:"errorReason,omitempty"`

    // ErrorMessage indicates that there is a problem reconciling the
    // state, and will be set to a descriptive error message.
    // +optional

>     ErrorMessage *string `json:"errorMessage,omitempty"`

Author: We are deferring introduction of Conditions, since there isn't a clear consensus on how to implement them yet, we are tracking this in the following issue: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1658

    // Phase represents the current phase of control plane actuation.

>     // E.g. Pending, Initialized, Ready, ScalingUp, ScalingDown, Failed etc.

Author: I've removed Phases, since we've already said that we want to move to more explictness around transitions of state and conditions here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1658

  controlPlaneRef:
    kind: ControlPlane
    apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
    name: my-controlplane
    namespace: default
  infrastructureRef:
    kind: AcmeCluster
    apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
    name: my-acmecluster
    namespace: default
---
kind: ControlPlane
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-control-plane
  namespace: default
spec:
  replicas: 1
  version: v1.16.0
  infrastructureTemplate:
    kind: AcmeProviderMachineTemplate
    apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
    namespace: default
    name: my-acmemachinetemplate
  kubeadmConfigSpec:
    initConfiguration:
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
    clusterConfiguration:
      apiServer:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
      controllerManager:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
    joinConfiguration:
      controlPlane: {}
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2

> kind: AcmeMachineTemplate

Author: Thanks for catching that! Fixed.

- To ease the adoption of v1alpha3, the migration mechanism should be built into Cluster API controllers.

#### Code organization

The types introduced in this proposal will live in the `cluster.x-k8s.io` API group. The controller(s) will also live inside `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api`.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### etcd membership

- If the leader is selected for deletion during a replacement for upgrade or scale down, the etcd cluster will be unavailable during that period as leader election takes place. Small time periods of unavailability should not significantly impact the running of the managed cluster’s API server.

> - Replication of the etcd log, if done for a sufficiently large datastore and saturates the network, machines may fail leader election, bringing down the cluster. To mitigate this, the control plane provider will only create machines serially, ensuring cluster health before moving onto operations for the next machine.

Author: Correct.

### Non-Goals / Future Work

Non-Goals listed in this document are intended to scope bound the current v1alpha3 implementation and are subject to change based on user feedback over time.  

- To manage non-machine based topologies, e.g.
  - Pod based control planes; these can be managed via standard kubernetes objects.
  - Non-node control planes (i.e. EKS, GKE, AKS); these can be managed via the respective APIs.
- To manage control plane deployments across failure domains, followup work for this will be tracked on [this issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1647).
- To manage CA certificates outside of what is provided by Kubeadm bootstrapping
- To manage etcd clusters in any topology other than stacked etcd.
- To address disaster recovery constraints, e.g. restoring a control plane from 0 replicas using a filesystem or volume snapshot copy of data persisted in etcd.
- To support rollbacks, as there is no datastore rollback guarantee for Kubernetes. Consumers should perform backups of the cluster prior to performing potentially destructive operations.

> - To mutate the configuration of live, running clusters (e.g. changing api-server flags), as this is the responsibility of the [component configuration working group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/wg-component-standard).

Reviewer 12: Will we have something in place to block this? We ran into a scenario where we needed to do this in v1alpha2. 

If we don't, it seems like it would be possible to change config flags by updating the `KubeadmConfigSpec` and (manually) rolling the control plane nodes one by one.

Author: @alexbrand currently we are adding a requirement that the `KubeadmConfigSpec` be treated immutably: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/1613/files#diff-32997217ac55782fca9596683679c2bfR308

We've also called this out as part of the Risks: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/1613/files#diff-32997217ac55782fca9596683679c2bfR542

Reviewer 12: Gotcha! Thanks, @detiber. It seems like we'd need to create a new cluster if the KubeadmConfig required changes. I have to catch up on the ComponentConfig efforts as well.

Author: My main motivation here is to keep the initial implementation a bit simplified. We'll need to figure out how to detect "safe" vs "unsafe" changes in the future or a way to detect safe rollback for "configuration" or "base image" only changes where kubernetes version is not affected.

Reviewer 12: Yes, absolutely. That makes sense to me 👍 .

    // +optional
    ControlPlaneReady bool `json:"controlPlaneReady,omitempty"`
```

#### Behavioral Changes from v1alpha2

- If Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is set:
  - [Status.ControlPlaneInitialized](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1243) is set based on the value of Status.Initialized for the referenced resource.
  - Status.ControlPlaneReady is set based on the value of Status.Ready for the referenced resource, this field is intended to eventually replace Status.ControlPlaneInitialized as a field that will be kept up to date instead of set only once.
- Current behavior will be preserved if `Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef` is not set.
- CA certificate secrets that were previously generated by the Kubeadm bootstrapper will now be generated by the KubeadmControlPlane Controller, maintaining backwards compatibility with the previous behavior if the KubeadmControlPlane is not used.
- The kubeconfig secret that was previously created by the Machine Controller will now be generated by the KubeadmControlPlane Controller, maintaining backwards compatibility with the previous behavior if the KubeadmControlPlane is not used.

> #### Behaviors

Reviewer 12: Will Kubernetes Events be emitted to communicate progress to the user? Is it worth calling those out?

Author: I don't believe we've explicitly called out events in previous proposals and I was treating it as an implicit requirement, since we already emit events from the other controllers.

Reviewer 12: Roger that 👍 
Thank you, @detiber.

    // reconciled.
    UnsupportedChangeKubeadmControlPlaneError KubeadmControlPlaneStatusError = "UnsupportedChange"

    // CreateKubeadmControlPlaneError indicates that an error was encountered
    // when trying to create the kubeadm control plane.
    CreateKubeadmControlPlaneError KubeadmControlPlaneStatusError = "CreateError"

    // UpdateKubeadmControlPlaneError indicates that an error was encountered
    // when trying to update the kubeadm control plane.
    UpdateKubeadmControlPlaneError KubeadmControlPlaneStatusError = "UpdateError"

    // DeleteKubeadmControlPlaneError indicates that an error was encountered
    // when trying to delete the kubeadm control plane.
    DeleteKubeadmControlPlaneError KubeadmControlPlaneStatusError = "DeleteError"
)
```

With the following validations:

- If `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` does not define external etcd (webhook):
  - `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.Replicas` is an odd number.
  - Configuration of external etcd is determined by introspecting the provided `KubeadmConfigSpec`.
- `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.Replicas` is >= 0 or is nil
- `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.Version != ""` (openapi)

> - `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` must be treated as immutable (via webhook)

Reviewer 3: Would we want to allow modifications to `Pre/PostKubeadmCommands`, `Files`?

Author: Do you have specific use cases in mind? It might get a bit tricky to determine what are allowed vs not allowed modifications. We already capture the lack of mutability here in the Risks section, since once we adopt v1beta2 types for kubeadm there may need to be changes made to the kustomize templates provided.

Reviewer 3: Nothing specifc. Was trying to reconcile what it said below about triggering an update based on changes to this. I'm happy to start with it immutable, and loosen if we have feedback that it's needed.

- `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.Replicas` must be an odd number.
- Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane, which will be determined by introspecting `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec`.
- Creating a KubeadmControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a KubeadmControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the KubeadmControlPlane to 3 replicas
- The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` should specify the `InitConfiguration`, `ClusterConfiguration`, and `JoinConfiguration` stanzas, and the KubeadmControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate.
  - This is different than current usage of `KubeadmConfig` and `KubeadmConfigTemplate` where it is recommended to specify `InitConfiguration`/`ClusterConfiguration` OR `JoinConfiguration` but not both.
- The underlying query used to find existing Control Plane Machines is based on the following hardcoded label selector:

```yaml
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-name: my-cluster

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/controlplane: "true"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      cluster.x-k8s.io/control-plane: "true"
```

  - Same as above minus etcd management
- Scale down operations must not be done in conjunction with an upgrade operation, this should not impact manual operations for recovery. This should also be enforced using a validation webhook.
- Scale down operations *could* be blocked based on the Health status
  - for stacked etcd quorum must be considered
  - for external etcd only availability of etcd should be considered.
  - Health status is described below.
- Scale to 0 must be rejected for the initial support, see below for deletion workflows.

![controlplane-init-7](images/controlplane/controlplane-init-7.png)

##### Delete of the entire KubeadmControlPlane (kubectl delete controlplane my-controlplane)

- Completely removing the control plane and issuing a delete on the underlying machines.
  - Deletion is equivalent to a scale to 1 followed by a deletion of a single replica control plane.
- User documentation should focus on deletion of the Cluster resource rather than the KubeadmControlPlane resource.
- Cluster deletion will need to be modified to ensure KubeadmControlPlane deletion is done in the proper order.

##### Cluster upgrade (using create-swap-and-delete)

> - Triggered on any changes to Version, InfrastructureTemplate, or the KubeadmConfiguration used.

Reviewer 3: It says above the kubeadm bits should be immutable? (although I just added a question there)

## Glossary

The lexicon used in this document is described in more detail [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/book/src/reference/glossary.md).  Any discrepancies should be rectified in the main Cluster API glossary.

### References

[Kubernetes Control Plane Management Overview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nlWKEr9OP3IeZO5W2cMd3A55ZXLOXcnc6dFu0K9_bms/edit#)

## Summary

This proposal outlines a new process for Cluster API to manage control plane machines as a single concept. This includes
upgrading, scaling up, and modifying the underlying image (e.g. AMI) of the control plane machines.

The control plane covered by this document is defined as the Kubernetes API server, scheduler, controller manager, DNS
and proxy services, and the underlying etcd data store.

## Motivation

During 2019 we saw control plane management implementations in each infrastructure provider. Much like
bootstrapping was identified as being reimplemented in every infrastructure provider and then extracted into Cluster API
Bootstrap Provider Kubeadm (CABPK), we believe we can reduce the redundancy of control plane management across providers

> and centralize the logic in Cluster API.

Author: I added another sentence to support the enablement of alternative implementations.

### Goals

- To establish new resource types for control plane management

> - To support single node and multiple control plane instances, with the requirement that the infrastructure provider supports some type of a stable endpoint for the API Server (Load Balancer, VIP, etc).

Author: Thanks, left off the hyphen, but made sure to use node consistently.

- To enable declarative orchestrated control plane upgrades
- To provide a default machine-based implementation using kubeadm

#### Additional goals of the default kubeadm machine-based Implementation

- To provide a kubeadm-based implementation that is infrastructure provider agnostic
- To enable declarative orchestrated replacement of control plane machines, such as to rollout an OS-level CVE fix.
- To manage a kubeadm-based, "stacked etcd" control plane
- To enable scaling of the number of control plane nodes
- To support pre-existing, user-managed, external etcd clusters
- To support only user-initiated remediation:
  E.g. user deletes a Machine. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the corresponding etcd member and updating related metadata

### Non-Goals / Future Work

Non-Goals listed in this document are intended to scope bound the current v1alpha3 implementation and are subject to change based on user feedback over time.

- To manage non-machine based topologies, e.g.

>   - Pod based control planes; these can be managed via standard kubernetes objects.

Author: Agreed, I had used previously suggested wording and have now updated it to remove the statements saying how such control planes should be implemented.

8. As a cluster operator, I want to be able to quickly respond to a non-Kubernetes CVE that affects my base image or Kubernetes dependencies by upgrading my clusters in an automated fashion.
9. As a cluster operator, I would like to upgrade to a new minor version of Kubernetes so that my cluster remains supported.
10. As a cluster operator, I want to know that my cluster isn’t working properly after creation. I have ended up with an API server I can access, but kube-proxy isn’t functional or new machines are not registering themselves with the control plane.

#### Identified features from user stories

1. Based on the function of kubeadm, the control plane provider must be able to scale the number of replicas of a control plane from 1 to X, meeting user stories 1 through 4.
2. To address user story 5, the control plane provider must provide validation of the number of replicas in a control plane. Where the stacked etcd topology is used (i.e., in the default implementation), the number of replicas must be an odd number, as per [etcd best practice](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3.12/faq/#why-an-odd-number-of-cluster-members). When external etcd is used, any number is valid.

> 3. In service of user story 5, the control plane provider must also manage etcd membership via kubeadm as part of scaling down (`kubeadm` takes care of adding the new etcd member when joining).

Author: Updated to be explicit that this was talking about the kubeadm control plane implementation.

    // +optional
    ControlPlaneRef *corev1.ObjectReference `json:"controlPlaneRef,omitempty"`
```

- Add `Cluster.Status.ControlPlaneReady` defined as:

```go
    // ControlPlaneReady defines if the control plane is ready.
    // +optional
    ControlPlaneReady bool `json:"controlPlaneReady,omitempty"`
```

#### Behavioral Changes from v1alpha2

- If Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef is set:
  - [Status.ControlPlaneInitialized](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1243) is set based on the value of Status.Initialized for the referenced resource.
  - Status.ControlPlaneReady is set based on the value of Status.Ready for the referenced resource, this field is intended to eventually replace Status.ControlPlaneInitialized as a field that will be kept up to date instead of set only once.
- Current behavior will be preserved if `Cluster.Spec.ControlPlaneRef` is not set.
- CA certificate secrets that were previously generated by the Kubeadm bootstrapper will now be generated by the KubeadmControlPlane Controller, maintaining backwards compatibility with the previous behavior if the KubeadmControlPlane is not used.

> - The kubeconfig secret that was previously created by the Machine Controller will now be generated by the KubeadmControlPlane Controller, maintaining backwards compatibility with the previous behavior if the KubeadmControlPlane is not used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The kubeconfig secret that was previously created by the Cluster Controller will now be generated by the KubeadmControlPlane Controller, maintaining backwards compatibility with the previous behavior if the KubeadmControlPlane is not used.
```

#### Behaviors

##### Create

- After a KubeadmControlPlane object is created, it must bootstrap a control plane with a given number of replicas.
- If an error occurs, `KubeadmControlPlane.Status.ErrorStatus` and `KubeadmControlPlane.Status.ErrorMessage` are populated.
- `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.Replicas` must be an odd number.
- Can create an arbitrary number of control planes if etcd is external to the control plane, which will be determined by introspecting `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec`.

> - Creating a KubeadmControlPlane with > 1 replicas is equivalent to creating a KubeadmControlPlane with 1 replica followed by scaling the KubeadmControlPlane to 3 replicas

Reviewer 13: I assume you mean equivalent to create it with 1 replica and scaling it up to the specified count (not necessarily 3)

Reviewer 7: Good catch, thanks!

Author: Fixed, thanks!

- The kubeadm bootstrapping configuration provided via `KubeadmControlPlane.Spec.KubeadmConfigSpec` should specify the `InitConfiguration`, `ClusterConfiguration`, and `JoinConfiguration` stanzas, and the KubeadmControlPlane controller will be responsible for splitting the config and passing it to the underlying Machines created as appropriate.
  - This is different than current usage of `KubeadmConfig` and `KubeadmConfigTemplate` where it is recommended to specify `InitConfiguration`/`ClusterConfiguration` OR `JoinConfiguration` but not both.
- The underlying query used to find existing Control Plane Machines is based on the following hardcoded label selector:

```yaml
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-name: my-cluster

>       cluster.x-k8s.io/control-plane: "true"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      cluster.x-k8s.io/control-plane: ""
```

    apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
    name: my-acmecluster
    namespace: default
---
kind: KubeadmControlPlane
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
metadata:
  name: my-control-plane
  namespace: default
spec:
  replicas: 1
  version: v1.16.0
  infrastructureTemplate:
    kind: AcmeProviderMachineTemplate
    apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
    namespace: default
    name: my-acmemachinetemplate
  kubeadmConfigSpec:
    initConfiguration:
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
    clusterConfiguration:
      apiServer:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
      controllerManager:
        extraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
    joinConfiguration:
      controlPlane: {}
      nodeRegistration:
        name: '{{ ds.meta_data.hostname }}'
        kubeletExtraArgs:
          cloud-provider: acme
---
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: AcmeProviderMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: my-acmemachinetemplate
  namespace: default
spec:
  osImage:
    id: objectstore-123456abcdef
  instanceType: θ9.medium

>   iamInstanceProfile: "control-plane.cluster-api-provider-acme.sigs.k8s.io"

Reviewer 3: Do we want to use x-k8s.io here?
